---
title: Towards Senders in Interfaces
document: P4223R0
date: 2026-05-11
audience:
  - SG1
  - LEWG
author:
  - name: Ian Petersen
    email: <ispeters@gmail.com>
toc: true
toc-depth: 3
---

# Abstract

Other than `std::execution::task`, all of the standard senders are instances of
exposition-only types, which means their types can only be used in deduced
contexts. Furthermore, the computations represented by compositions of standard
senders are fully reflected in the types of those compositions. These
characteristics make the majority of standard senders unusable as the return
values of separately-compiled functions, preventing their use on interface
boundaries. `task` *can* serve in that role, but, as a coroutine type, it is
unsuitable in many domains. This paper addresses this gap by proposing
`std::execution::function`, an allocator-aware class template, specializations
of which are senders that can serve as the return type of separately-compiled
asynchronous functions.

Also proposed is a new query, `std::execution::get_frame_allocator`, inspired
by Vinnie Falco *et al.*'s work in [@P4003R2]. When `std::execution::function`
needs to dynamically allocate space for an operation state, it prefers to use
the allocator returned from `get_frame_allocator`, giving users the means to
control the allocation strategy for asynchronous function activation frames
independently from general allocations to take advantage of the distinct
patterns exhibited by activation frame allocation.

# Revision History

* R0 – First revision

# Background

Separately-compiled functions are useful; even with modules making it cheaper at
compile time to expose the implementation details of shared functions, there’s
good reason to declare a function in one place and define it in another while
leaving implementation freedom in the definition. The existing standard senders
(other than `std::execution::task`) can’t serve in this role because they are
all of exposition-only types, and the full structure of the computation they
represent is expressed in their types, which defeats any effort to separate
interface from implementation. The standard library ought to fill this gap by
providing a sender that can serve as the return type of a function with separate
declaration and definition, including virtual member functions.

# Requirements

The requirements of a solution are:

* **Separation of interface and implementation**; the primary need identified in
  this paper is the ability to separate *what* an async function does (its
  interface) from *how* it does it (its implementation). The problem with the
  existing senders is that their types reflect the fully composed computation
  they represent so it is impossible to achieve this separation with the status
  quo.
* **Broadly applicable**; senders are intended to be usable everywhere that C++
  can be used so the means for separating interface from implementation should
  be just as widely usable. Meeting this requirement includes customizable
  control over any memory allocation that is required, and the ability to avoid
  throwing exceptions.
* **Fully general**; there must be no arbitrary limitations on the async
  functions that can be abstracted. In practice, this requires supporting
  arbitrary combinations of completion signatures, and arbitrary combinations of
  environment queries.
* **Composable with other senders**; separating an async function’s interface
  from its implementation must not render that function incompatible with the
  surrounding async C++ ecosystem. The most direct way to meet this requirement
  is to effect the interface-implementation separation through a type that
  models `sender`.
* **Ergonomic interface**; interface boundaries exist at all layers of software
  so describing those boundaries is a common activity. The mechanism should
  therefore be straightforward to use, easy to understand, and have good
  defaults.

# Designs Considered

## `exec::any_sender`

[`exec::any_sender`](https://github.com/NVIDIA/stdexec/blob/main/include/exec/any_sender_of.hpp)
(and
[`unifex::any_sender_of`](https://github.com/facebookexperimental/libunifex/blob/main/include/unifex/any_sender_of.hpp)
before it) provides a type-erased container that can store an arbitrary sender
that matches the constraints specified by the arguments provided to the class
template. For example
([https://godbolt.org/z/W5oYj4a6d](https://godbolt.org/z/W5oYj4a6d)),

```c++
// async_int.h
#include <exec/any_sender_of.hpp>
#include <stdexec/execution.hpp>

using any_int_receiver = exec::any_receiver<
   STDEXEC::completion_signatures<STDEXEC::set_value_t(int)>>;
using any_int_sender = exec::any_sender<any_int_receiver>;

any_int_sender async_int(int i);

// async_int.cpp
#include "async_int.h"

namespace ex = STDEXEC;

any_int_sender async_int(int i) { return ex::just(i); }

// main.cpp
#include <stdexec/execution.hpp>

#include "async_int.h"

namespace ex = STDEXEC;

int main() {
   auto [result] = ex::sync_wait(async_int(42)).value();

   return result;
}
```

The design of `any_sender` results in three type-erased entities: the sender,
the receiver to which it is connected, and the operation state that results
therefrom. The type-erased receiver is of fixed size because it can be
implemented in terms of a pointer to the concrete receiver plus a vtable, but
the type-erased sender and the operation state that results from connecting it
to a type-erased receiver can both be of arbitrary size so using an
`any_sender` may require two allocations: an early one to make space for the
sender, and a late one to make space for the operation state.

## `exec::function`

[`exec::function`](https://github.com/NVIDIA/stdexec/blob/main/include/exec/function.hpp)
goes in a different direction; rather than erasing an arbitrary sender,
`function` erases a sender *factory* and bundles it with the arguments to that
factory. Usage looks like this
([https://godbolt.org/z/Gs1Tb1Tsj](https://godbolt.org/z/Gs1Tb1Tsj)):

```c++
// async_int.h
#include <exec/function.hpp>
#include <stdexec/execution.hpp>

exec::function<int(int) noexcept> async_int(int i);

// async_int.cpp
#include "async_int.h"

namespace ex = STDEXEC;

exec::function<int(int) noexcept> async_int(int i) {
   return exec::function<int(int) noexcept>(
       std::move(i),  //
       [](int i) noexcept { return ex::just(i); });
}

// main.cpp
#include <stdexec/execution.hpp>

#include "async_int.h"

namespace ex = STDEXEC;

int main() {
   auto [result] = ex::sync_wait(async_int(42)).value();

   return result;
}
```

Like the existing standard senders, `function` has no required allocation upon
construction because it merely curries its arguments into a tuple. When a
`function` is connected to a suitable receiver, the curried arguments are
passed to the type-erased sender factory resulting in a sender of arbitrary
size; that sender is connected to a type-erased receiver that, like with
`any_sender`, is of fixed size, producing an operation state of arbitrary size.
Thus, `function`, like `any_sender`, may need to dynamically allocate storage
for the operation state.

## Feature Comparison

The following table compares the implementation details of the two considered
types.

+---------------------------------+-----------------------+---------------------------+
| Property                        | `any_sender`          | `function`                |
+:================================+:======================+:==========================+
| What is type-erased?            | A sender              | A sender factory          |
+---------------------------------+-----------------------+---------------------------+
| What is exposed?                | Possible completions\ | Possible completions\     |
|                                 | Required queries      | Required queries\         |
|                                 |                       | Sender factory parameters |
+---------------------------------+-----------------------+---------------------------+
| May allocate upon construction? | Yes                   | No                        |
+---------------------------------+-----------------------+---------------------------+
| May allocate in `connect`?      | Yes                   | Yes                       |
+---------------------------------+-----------------------+---------------------------+

## Requirements Comparison

The following table compares the two types for how well they meet the given
requirements.

| Requirement | `any_sender` | `function` |
| :---- | :---- | :---- |
| Separation of interface and implementation | ✅ yes | ✅ yes |
| Broadly applicable | 🟡 maybe | 🟡 maybe |
| Fully general | ✅ yes | ✅ yes |
| Composable with other senders | ✅ yes | ✅ yes |
| Ergonomic interface | 🟡 maybe | ✅ yes |

### The yeses

* **Separation of interface and implementation**; both designs support this
  separation of concerns, but with different trade-offs. `any_sender` fully
  erases an arbitrary sender, exposing only the details of the required sender
  contract (i.e. the sender’s potential completions, and the set of required
  queries), while `function` erases a sender *factory*, which eliminates the
  possibility of allocating storage for a sender, but adds to its interface the
  parameters (type, number, and order) necessary to construct the sender.

* **Fully general**; the current implementations of `any_sender` and `function`
  in stdexec have slightly different interfaces, but there’s no technical
  reason they couldn’t be unified. The full extent of the sender contract can
  be expressed in type arguments to template parameters (with
  `completion_signatures` to express completions, and a newly-invented
  `queries` type-list class template to communicate required queries).

* **Composable with other senders**; both solutions solve the problem of
  separating interface from implementation with a class template,
  specializations of which model `sender` so both approaches participate fully
  in the existing asynchronous C++ ecosystem.

### The maybes

* **Broadly applicable**; both `any_sender` and `function` may have to
  dynamically allocate memory if the objects they type-erase are bigger than
  any implementation-defined small-object buffer they might employ.

  Dynamic allocation (and its attendant risk of `bad_alloc` exceptions) may
  exclude either approach from certain constrained environments where C++ is
  used. First-class allocator support can broaden the appeal, though, and both
  approaches can have first-class allocator support.

* **Ergonomic interface**; `any_sender` and `function` can both support
  equivalent interfaces for describing the senders they erase (i.e. the
  possible completions and required queries), but they differ in when they may
  allocate. Both `any_sender` and `function` may allocate in `connect`, at
  which point there is a receiver environment available from which an allocator
  can be queried, but only `any_sender` allocates upon construction.

  As Vinnie Falco *et al*. explore in [@P4003R2], [@P4172R0], and [@P4127R0],
  construction-time allocation is difficult to customize with an ergonomic
  interface. The two choices presented in P4172R0, section 8 are 1) via the
  parameter list with `allocator_arg_t`, or 2) out-of-band propagation via
  free functions that use hidden state to keep track of the allocator. In
  contrast, `connect`\-time allocation can be controlled with a receiver query
  providing an allocator intended to be used when allocating activation frames
  (i.e. operation states) for asynchronous functions.

  Since `any_sender` and `function` both may allocate in `connect`, they can
  make equivalent use of a receiver query to retrieve the controlling
  allocator, but `any_sender` requires a construction-time allocator that will
  be, comparatively speaking, awkward to provide and that isn’t needed by
  `function`.

## Analysis

As Robert Leahy has explained ([@Leahy]) function invocation can be broken down
into four steps:

1. Prepare the arguments
2. Pass the arguments
3. Allow the function to run
4. Collect the result

Unlike synchronous functions, where the final three steps are inextricably
coupled, the Sender/Receiver design makes each of the above steps separately
identifiable for asynchronous functions:

1. the arguments are “prepared” by currying them into a sender;
2. the arguments are “passed” by connecting the sender to a receiver, producing
   an operation state;
3. the function is “allowed to run” by invoking `start` on the operation state;
   and
4. the result is “collected” in the receiver’s completion methods (`set_value`,
   `set_error`, or `set_stopped`).

This decomposition of asynchronous function invocation into separable steps
makes it clear that a sender is, as Robert says, “the asynchronous analogue of
a nullary invocable.” It also highlights the analogy between an operation state
and an “activation frame”, which is the private storage allocated for the
duration of a function’s execution that is commonly called a “stack frame” when
the function is a traditional synchronous one.

That `any_sender` and `function` both risk allocating when constructing their
respective operation states is perhaps unsurprising in light of the analogy
between asynchronous operation states and synchronous stack frames: it is the
callee’s responsibility to allocate its own activation frame upon being called,
not the caller’s. This responsibility lies with the callee precisely because
the interface to a function is limited to its signature, which communicates
parameter and return details but not the implementation detail of how much
temporary storage is required during execution[^1]. The allocation differences
between synchronous and asynchronous functions are, of course, that the
abstract machine’s definition of automatic storage (which programmers typically
call “the stack”) exists only for the duration of a synchronous function
invocation, which makes it unusable for asynchronous functions whose dynamic
extent is not bounded by a synchronous function’s activation. The need for
dynamic allocation of a type-erased operation state is thus a direct
consequence of the abstract machine forcing us to use dynamic storage for
asynchronous activation frames. With that said, as Vinnie Falco *et al.*
articulate in section 6.3 of P4712R2, activation frame allocations follow a
distinct pattern that is analogous to the allocation pattern of synchronous
stack frames; as they say, “sizes repeat, lifetimes nest, and deallocation
order mirrors allocation order” and an activation frame-specific allocator can
exploit that pattern to minimize overhead at runtime.

In contrast to the allocation pattern of an operation’s activation frame, there
is no structural reason for the allocations that may be required upon
construction of `any_sender`s to follow any particular pattern because senders
are value types that can be constructed in one place, passed around where they
are needed, and used (or discarded) according to the needs of the program. This
“extra” allocation that `any_sender` requires over `function` is therefore
different in kind from the activation frame allocation that they share, which
is intrinsically required by any solution to the interface-implementation
separation problem that admits arbitrarily large activation frames without
making the size of those frames part of the interface.

The sharp divide between allocation “kinds” and the tight analogy between
operation states and stack frames motivates separating the “frame allocator”
out from other allocators. The desire for a means to use senders in interfaces
in as broad a selection of environments as possible also motivates making frame
allocation a customization point so that systems with specific allocation
requirements or restrictions can exercise control over how operation states are
allocated as a separate concern from allocations more generally. This
motivation seems to be independent of any particular strategy for enabling
senders in interfaces.

## Conclusion

The abovementioned trade-offs suggest that, of the two designs considered,
`function` is a better match for a broadly-applicable, ergonomic, type-erasing
sender for use in asynchronous interface declarations. It is equivalent to
`any_sender` in most ways, but, at the expense of erasing slightly less (i.e.
exposing the sender factory parameters in the interface), imposes only the
intrinsically-required amount of dynamic allocation, which broadens its
applicability. This paper therefore proposes two new library extensions:

* `std::execution::function`, a class template, specializations of which are
  type-erasing senders, and
* `std::execution::get_frame_allocator`, a new receiver environment query whose
  result, when present, is an allocator to be used when dynamically allocating
  operation states.

In support of expressing the sender contract supported by a given
specialization of `function`, this paper also proposes two new class templates,
`std::execution::queries` and `std::execution::attrs`, each of which serve as
type-lists to communicate the receiver queries and sender attributes,
respectively, required by a given `function`.

# Interface Discussion

Specifying the interface to a synchronous function is relatively
straightforward:

* Specify the return type
* Specify the parameters (type and order)
* Specify whether the function may throw or not

Asynchronous functions are more complicated. They can complete on three
different channels, and in multiple ways on the value and error channels. They
can depend on the results of certain queries against the receiver’s
environment, and they may advertise information through the sender’s
attributes. Describing all of this information in a concise, readable way is
non-trivial. This paper proposes a verbose-but-flexible syntax for specifying
all the details of a `function`’s interface, plus several options for
specifying common interfaces with briefer syntax.

## Concise Descriptions of Common Cases

The simplest case is a fallible asynchronous function from `bar` and `baz` to
`int` that requires no particular receiver queries and offers no particular
sender attributes:

```c++
function<int(bar, baz)>
```

As proposed, the foregoing type describes a sender with the completion
signatures `set_value_t(int)`, `set_error_t(exception_ptr)`, and
`set_stopped_t()`. The failure signal can be removed by adding `noexcept` to
the function type argument:

```c++
function<int(bar, baz) noexcept>
```

## Specifying Required Queries

Requiring that the receiver’s environment and/or sender’s attributes support a
set of queries can be done with the `queries` and `attrs` type-list class
templates, respectively, like so:

```c++
// require an inplace_stop_token in the receiver's environment
function<
   int(bar, baz),
   queries<inplace_stop_token(get_stop_token_t) noexcept>>

// require that the erased sender be from domain MyDomain
function<int(bar, baz), attrs<MyDomain(get_domain_t) noexcept>>

// require both
function<
   int(bar, baz),
   queries<inplace_stop_token(get_stop_token_t) noexcept>,
   attrs<MyDomain(get_domain_t) noexcept>>
```

## Controlling Completion Signatures

To erase senders whose completion signatures can’t be described with a function
signature, such as those with multiple value or error completions, or
completions with more than one parameter in the value channel, the existing
`completion_signatures` class template will serve. However, given that
`function` erases a sender *factory* and thus must express the factory’s
parameter list in its type, we need more than just `completion_signatures`.
This paper proposes that the function type syntax communicate the factory
parameters, with `sender_tag` as the return type to support future extensions
of `function` that can erase senders whose `sender_concept` nested alias refers
to future categories of senders. The result looks like this:

```c++
// erase a sender that can only complete with set_value(int)
function<
   sender_tag(bar, baz),
   completion_signatures<set_value_t(int)>>

// erase a sender that can fail with an error_code but not an exception
function<
   sender_tag(bar, baz),
   completion_signatures<
       set_value_t(int),
       set_error_t(error_code)>>

// erase a sender that can succeed in two different ways
function<
   sender_tag(bar, baz),
   completion_signatures<
       set_value_t(int),
       set_value_t(int, error_code)>>
```

## Full Control

The fully-general syntax requires the user to provide the factory parameters,
the completion signatures, the required receiver queries, and the required
sender attributes, which can be done by combining the above variations, like
so:

```c++
function<
   sender_tag(bar, baz),
   completion_signatures<set_value_t(int)>,
   queries<inplace_stop_token(get_stop_token_t) noexcept>
   attrs<MyDomain(get_domain_t) noexcept>>
```

## Summary

A `function`’s interface includes:

* the parameters to its erased sender factory;
* the possible completions;
* the required queries on the receiver’s environment; and
* the required queries in the sender’s attributes.

The sender factory parameters are expressed with a function type parameter. If
the function type’s return type is `std::execution::sender_tag` then the
sender’s completions must be expressed with another parameter that is a
specialization of `completion_signatures` and the function type must not be
`noexcept`; otherwise, the sender’s completions are computed from the function
type:

* `void`\-returning function types result in a `set_value_t()` completion; for
  all other return types `T`, the completions include `set_value_t(T)`.
* `noexcept` function types do not result in error completions; non-`noexcept`
  functions may complete with `set_error_t(exception_ptr)`.
* `set_stopped_t()` is in the computed completions for all function types.

The queries that are required to be valid against the eventual receiver’s
environment are specified with a type parameter that is a specialization of the
class template `std::execution::queries`, where each parameter to `queries` is
a possibly-`noexcept` function type of the form `Return(Query, Args…)`. For
each such function type, the expression `q(env, args…)` must be valid, where
`q` is of type `Query`, `env` is the receiver’s environment, and `args…` is a
pack of type `Args…`. If the function type is `noexcept` then that expression
must also be `noexcept`.

Similar to receiver queries, \`future\` can express required attributes in the
erased sender with a type parameter that is a specialization of the class
template `std::execution::attrs`, where each parameter to `attrs` is a function
type with the same semantics as the parameters to `queries`, except applied to
the sender’s attributes rather than the receiver’s environment.

# Proposed

## `std::execution::get_frame_allocator`

Add a new subsection to the end of [exec.queries]{.sref} named
[exec.get.frame.allocator]:

:::add

[33.5.?]{.pnum} **`execution::get_frame_allocator`**

[1]{.pnum} `get_frame_allocator` asks a queryable object for its associated
frame allocator.

[2]{.pnum} The name `get_frame_allocator` denotes a query object. For a
subexpression `env`, `get_frame_allocator(env)` is expression-equivalent to
`$MANDATE-NOTHROW$($AS-CONST$(env).query(get_frame_allocator))`

*Mandates*: If the expression above is well-formed, its type satisfies
`$simple-allocator$` ([allocator.requirements.general]{.sref}).

[3]{.pnum} `forwarding_query(get_frame_allocator)` is a core constant
expression and has value `true`.

:::

## `std::execution::function`

Add a new subsection to the end of [exec.snd]{.sref} named [exec.function]:

:::add

[33.9.?]{.pnum} **`execution::function`**

TBD, but, in code, it would look like this:

```c++
namespace std::execution {

template <bool Nothrow, class Return, class Query, class... Args>
struct $env-archetype$ { // $exposition only$
   Return query(Query, Args&&...) const noexcept(Nothrow);
};

template <
   class Env,
   bool Nothrow,
   class Return,
   class Query,
   class... Args>
concept $queryable-with-impl$ = // $exposition only$
   invocable<Query, const Env&, Args...> &&
   (!Nothrow || is_nothrow_invocable_v<Query, const Env&, Args...>) &&
   same_as<Return, invoke_result_t<Query, const Env&, Args...>>;

template <bool Nothrow, class Return, class Query, class... Args>
concept $queryable-with$ = // $exposition only$
   $queryable-with-impl$<$env-archetype$<Nothrow, Return, Query, Args...>,
                        Nothrow, Return, Query, Args...>;

template <class T>
inline constexpr bool $is-query-sig-v$ = false; // $exposition only$

template <class Return, class Query, class... Args>
inline constexpr bool
   $is-query-sig-v$<Return(Query, Args...)> = // $exposition only$
   $queryable-with$<false, Return, Query, Args...>;

template <class Return, class Query, class... Args>
inline constexpr bool
   $is-query-sig-v$<Return(Query, Args...) noexcept> = // $exposition only$
   $queryable-with$<true, Return, Query, Args...>;

template <class Env, class Sig>
inline constexpr bool $has-query-sig-v$ = false; // $exposition only$

template <class Env, class Return, class Query, class... Args>
inline constexpr bool
   $has-query-sig-v$<Env, Return(Query, Args...)> = // $exposition only$
   $queryable-with-impl$<Env, false, Return, Query, Args...>;

template <class Env, class Return, class Query, class... Args>
inline constexpr bool
   $has-query-sig-v$<Env, Return(Query, Args...) noexcept> = // $exposition only$
   $queryable-with-impl$<Env, true, Return, Query, Args...>;

template <class Env, class... Sigs>
inline constexpr bool $has-query-sigs-v$ = // $exposition only$
   ($has-query-sig-v$<Env, Sigs> && ...);

template <class Sndr, class... Queries>
concept $sender-attributes-contain$ = // $exposition only$
   $has-query-sigs-v$<env_of_t<Sndr>, Queries...>;

template <class... Queries>
   requires($is-query-sig-v$<Queries> && ...)
struct queries;

template <class... Attrs>
   requires($is-query-sig-v$<Attrs> && ...)
struct attrs;

template <class Rcvr>
struct $opstate$ { // $exposition only$
   using operation_state_concept = operation_state_tag;

   template <class Factory>
   constexpr explicit $opstate$(Rcvr rcvr, Factory factory); // $exposition only$

   constexpr void start() & noexcept;
};

template <class... Queries>
struct $virt-env$ { // $exposition only$
   // an appropriately noexcept-qualified Return query(Args...) for
   // each function type in Queries...
};

template <class Sigs, class... Queries>
struct $virt-receiver$; // $exposition only$

template <class... Sigs, class... Queries>
struct $virt-receiver$<
   completion_signatures<Sigs...>,
   Queries...> { // $exposition only$
   using receiver_concept = receiver_tag;

   // the set of completion functions specified in Sigs...

   constexpr $virt-env$<Queries...> get_env() const noexcept;
};

template <class Sndr, class Sigs, class Queries, class Attrs>
inline constexpr bool $matching-sender-v$ = false; // $exposition only$

template <class Sndr, class... Sigs, class... Queries, class... Attrs>
inline constexpr bool
   $matching-sender-v$<
      Sndr,
      completion_signatures<Sigs...>,
      queries<Queries...>,
      attrs<Attrs...>> = // $exposition only$
   $sender-to$<Sndr,
             $virt-receiver$<completion_signatures<Sigs...>, Queries...>> &&
   $sender-attributes-contain$<Sndr, Attrs...>;

template <class Factory, class Sigs, class Queries, class Attrs, class... Args>
concept $matching-sender-factory$ = // $exposition only$
   invocable<Factory, Args...> &&
   is_trivially_copyable_v<Factory> &&
   $matching-sender-v$<
      invoke_result_t<Factory, Args...>,
      Sigs,
      Queries,
      Attrs>;

template <class...>
struct $func-impl$; // $exposition only$

template <
   class Concept,
   class... Args,
   class... Sigs,
   class... Queries,
   class... Attrs>
struct $func-impl$<
   Concept(Args...),
   completion_signatures<Sigs...>,
   queries<Queries...>,
   attrs<Attrs...>> { // $exposition only$
   using sender_concept = Concept;

   template <
      $matching-sender-factory$<
         completion_signatures<Sigs...>,
         queries<Queries...>,
         attrs<Attrs...>,
         Args...>
      Factory>
       requires(!same_as<$func-impl$, decay_t<Factory>>)
   constexpr explicit
      $func-impl$(Args&&... args, Factory fact) // $exposition only$
       noexcept((is_nothrow_constructible_v<decay_t<Args>, Args> && ...));

   template <class Sndr, class... Env>
       requires(sizeof...(Env) == 0 && sizeof...(Queries) == 0) ||
               (sizeof...(Env) == 1 && $has-query-sigs-v$<Env..., Queries...>)
   static consteval auto get_completion_signatures();

   template <class Receiver>
   $opstate$<Receiver> connect(Receiver rcvr) &&;

   template <class Receiver>
       requires copy_constructible<_func_impl>
   $opstate$<Receiver> connect(Receiver rcvr) const& {
       return $func-impl$($this).connect(std::move(rcvr));
   }

  private:
   $product-type$<Args...> $args_$;  // $exposition only$
   // chosen to be large enough to store one of:
   //  - pointer-to-function
   //  - pointer-to-member function
   //  - pointer-to-member data
   static constexpr size_t $sender-factory-size$ =
       2 $ sizeof(void$);  // $exposition only$
   byte $sender-factory-storage_$[$sender-factory-size$]{}; // exposition
                                                        // only

   using $virt-receiver-t$ = $virt-receiver$<completion_signatures<Sigs...>,
                                         Queries...>;  // $exposition only$
   $virt-opstate$ ($$operation-factory_$)(void$, $virt-receiver-t$,
                                      Args&&...);  // $exposition only$
};

template <class T, bool Nothrow>
struct $completions-of-sig-impl$; // $exposition only$

template <class $completions-of-sig-impl$, class... Args>
struct $completions-of-sig-impl$<Return(Args...), false> { // $exposition only$
   using type =
       completion_signatures<set_value_t(Return),
                             set_error_t(exception_ptr),
                             set_stopped_t()>;
};

template <class... Args>
struct $completions-of-sig-impl$<void(Args...), false> { // $exposition only$
   using type =
       completion_signatures<set_value_t(),
                             set_error_t(exception_ptr),
                             set_stopped_t()>;
};

template <class Return, class... Args>
struct $completions-of-sig-impl$<Return(Args...), true> { // $exposition only$
   using type = completion_signatures<set_value_t(Return),
                                      set_stopped_t()>;
};

template <class... Args>
struct $completions-of-sig-impl$<void(Args...), true> { // $exposition only$
   using type = completion_signatures<set_value_t(),
                                      set_stopped_t()>;
};

template <class T>
struct $completions-of-sig$; // $exposition only$

template <class Return, class... Args>
struct $completions-of-sig$<Return(Args...)> // $exposition only$
   : $completions-of-sig-impl$<Return(Args...), false> {};

template <class Return, class... Args>
struct $completions-of-sig$<Return(Args...) noexcept> // $exposition only$
   : $completions-of-sig-impl$<Return(Args...), true> {};

template <class T>
using $completions-of-sig-t$ = // $exposition only$
   $completions-of-sig$<T>::type;

template <class...>
struct $make-func$; // $exposition only$

template <class Return, class... Args>
struct $make-func$<Return(Args...)> { // $exposition only$
   using type =
       $func-impl$<sender_tag(Args...),
                 $completions-of-sig-t$<Return(Args...)>,
                 queries<>, attrs<>>;
};

template <class Return, class... Args>
struct $make-func$<Return(Args...) noexcept> { // $exposition only$
   using type = $func-impl$<sender_tag(Args...),
                          $completions-of-sig-t$<Return(Args...) noexcept>,
                          queries<>, attrs<>>;
};

template <class Return, class... Args, class... Queries>
struct $make-func$<Return(Args...), queries<Queries...>> { // $exposition only$
   using type =
       $func-impl$<sender_tag(Args...),
                 $completions-of-sig-t$<Return(Args...)>,
                 queries<Queries...>, attrs<>>;
};

template <class Return, class... Args, class... Queries>
struct $make-func$<
   Return(Args...) noexcept,
   queries<Queries...>> { // $exposition only$
   using type = $func-impl$<sender_tag(Args...),
                          $completions-of-sig-t$<Return(Args...) noexcept>,
                          queries<Queries...>, attrs<>>;
};

template <class Return, class... Args, class... Attrs>
struct $make-func$<Return(Args...), attrs<Attrs...>> { // $exposition only$
   using type =
       $func-impl$<sender_tag(Args...),
                 $completions-of-sig-t$<Return(Args...)>,
                 queries<>, attrs<Attrs...>>;
};

template <class Return, class... Args, class... Attrs>
struct $make-func$<Return(Args...) noexcept, attrs<Attrs...>> { // $exposition only$
   using type = $func-impl$<sender_tag(Args...),
                          $completions-of-sig-t$<Return(Args...) noexcept>,
                          queries<>, attrs<Attrs...>>;
};

template <class Return, class... Args, class... Queries, class... Attrs>
struct $make-func$<
   Return(Args...),
   queries<Queries...>,
   attrs<Attrs...>> { // $exposition only$
   using type =
       $func-impl$<sender_tag(Args...),
                 $completions-of-sig-t$<Return(Args...)>,
                 queries<Queries...>,
                 attrs<Attrs...>>;
};

template <class Return, class... Args, class... Queries, class... Attrs>
struct $make-func$<Return(Args...) noexcept, queries<Queries...>,
                 attrs<Attrs...>> { // $exposition only$
   using type = $func-impl$<sender_tag(Args...),
                          $completions-of-sig-t$<Return(Args...) noexcept>,
                          queries<Queries...>,
                          attrs<Attrs...>>;
};

template <class... Args, class... Sigs>
struct $make-func$<
   sender_tag(Args...),
   completion_signatures<Sigs...>> { // $exposition only$
   using type = $func-impl$<sender_tag(Args...),
                          completion_signatures<Sigs...>,
                          queries<>, attrs<>>;
};

template <class... Args, class... Sigs, class... Queries>
struct $make-func$<sender_tag(Args...), completion_signatures<Sigs...>,
                 queries<Queries...>> { // $exposition only$
   using type = $func-impl$<sender_tag(Args...),
                          completion_signatures<Sigs...>,
                          queries<Queries...>,
                          attrs<>>;
};

template <class... Args, class... Sigs, class... Attrs>
struct $make-func$<sender_tag(Args...), completion_signatures<Sigs...>,
                 attrs<Attrs...>> { // $exposition only$
   using type = $func-impl$<sender_tag(Args...),
                          completion_signatures<Sigs...>,
                          queries<>,
                          attrs<Attrs...>>;
};

template <class... Args, class... Sigs, class... Queries, class... Attrs>
struct $make-func$<sender_tag(Args...), completion_signatures<Sigs...>,
                 queries<Queries...>, attrs<Attrs...>> { // $exposition only$
   using type = $func-impl$<sender_tag(Args...),
                          completion_signatures<Sigs...>,
                          queries<Queries...>,
                          attrs<Attrs...>>;
};

template <class... Args>
using function = $make-func$<Args...>::type;

}  // namespace std::execution
```

:::

# Acknowledgements

Thank you to Vinnie Falco and the team at C++ Alliance for your efforts to
explain the shortcomings of Senders and Receivers as shipped in C++26 when
applied to network IO problems. This proposal is a synthesis of my
understanding of the problems you’ve articulated and of the Sender/Receiver
architecture; it wouldn’t have happened without your prompting and
explanations.

Thank  you to Robert Leahy for repeatedly articulating so clearly and in fine
detail how senders project regular old functions into the asynchronous domain.
Your talks have changed how I think about senders, and your chosen vocabulary
has made it easier for me to explain and reason about async C++. Thanks also
for early feedback on this paper.

Finally, thanks to Eric Niebler, Ville Voutilainen, and the rest of the folks
in the std::execution Discord who helped me refine the design of `function`
both before and after I started writing a prototype.

[^1]:  This analogy can also explain the leak of implementation into interface
    that exists in the standard senders today: today’s fully-concrete senders
    are like inline functions, where the compiler must be able to see the full
    implementation to be able to (among other things) allocate space in the
    caller’s frame for the callee’s activation frame.

---
references:
  - id: Leahy
    citation-label: Leahy
    title: Evolving C++ Networking with Senders & Receivers \[part 1\]
    author:
      - family: Leahy
        given: Robert
    URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S5v7f8rjSVQ
---
